# 1.1 - Introduction

Recommended reading:

- Hall & Slonka, pp. 1-7

## What is Assembly Language?

An assembly language is a low-level programming language that utilizes statements and constructs with a very close relationship to the underlying machine instructions used by the target computer processor.

For some, that may be an adequate definition; but, for most of us, it does not really answer the question, "What is assembly language?" In fact, it raises more questions than answers. What is a low-level programming language? What are machine instructions? How does one use assembly language? Why should anybody care?

Thus begins our quest for assembly language enlightenment.[^enlightenment] There will be mountains to climb and streams to ford during this journey - binary numbers, boolean logic, computer architecture, a dusting of history, the world of x86, branching, looping, functions, and more. But if you make it to the end, you'll find learning assembly language an extremely rewarding endeavor that opens up a myriad of possibilities and avenues of additional exploration.

[^enlightenment]: Enlightenment not guaranteed.

### Translation Pipeline

To understand assembly language, we need to understand how a computer program is created.

A computer is a machine. Give it a list of instructions to perform and it executes them. Of course, humans don't speak the same language a computer does. There needs to be a translation process that takes our instructions and transforms them into a language the computer understands. We'll refer to this process as the _translation pipeline_.[^translation-pipeline]

[^translation-pipeline]: Hall & Slonka, p. 4.

The pipeline has four main stages:

- High-level language
- Assembly language
- Machine language
- Digital logic

A software developer starts at the beginning of the translation pipeline, writing computer programs using one of the many high-level programming languages available today (C, C++, Rust, C#, Java, Python, etc.). In fact, it's possible for a developer to spend an entire career at the top of the pipeline without needing to know what happens below, how their code is translated into an executable computer program, or how a computer actually runs their program.

This is no slight to such a developer. The abstractions provided by high-level languages, frameworks, and toolchains exist exactly for that purpose: enable developers to be productive solving problems they were hired to solve, not worrying about how a computer processor works.

However, there are domains where such knowledge is beneficial or even required. As a computer scientist, it's important to have a basic understanding of how a computer actually operates. And this knowledge helps explain what assembly language is.

We'll start at the end of the translation pipeline and work backwards. The goal is not to cover each stage in depth, but highlight it enough to help understand what assembly language actually is.

### Digital Logic

The fundamental operation of a modern computer is built upon Boolean logic. Boolean logic is a set of mathematical operations where only two values are available: `true` and `false`. Example operations include `AND`, `OR`, `XOR` (exclusive or), `NOT`, `NAND` (not and), and `NOR` (not or).

Take the `AND` operation as an example. The `AND` operation takes two inputs and produces one output. The output is `true` only if both inputs are `true`. We can represent all possible combinations of inputs and outputs using a truth table:

| x | y | x AND y |
| :-: | :-: | :-: |
| F | F | F |
| T | F | F |
| F | T | F |
| T | T | T |

Although it seems simple, Boolean logic is very powerful. It maps neatly into the binary number system, where there are only two digits: `0` and `1`. The different operations can be chained together in many ways to create computational constructs and implement algorithms.

However, at this point it's still abstract. Computers exist in the real, physical world. How do we get there? Electricity is used to recreate these abstract concepts in the real world. A high voltage represents `true` (i.e., `1` or `on`) and a low (or zero) voltage represents `false` (i.e., `0` or `off`).

Electric circuits are constructed to take advantage of Boolean logic and develop complex systems that can store data and perform mathematical operations using that data, such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. 

Digital logic, as it is called, forms the building blocks of digital electronics. A digital computer is designed around these building blocks. Using the binary number system, we can provide instructions and data as input to a computer and get the result of those instructions as output.

In this course, we'll look at number systems and how binary numbers work, how we can encode different types of data into a binary number, the basics of Boolean logic, and an introduction to computer architecture.

For now, though, we've established the end of the translation pipeline: the actual hardware our program runs on, consisting of digital circuits rooted in digital logic.

### Machine Language

With the physical hardware of the computer in place, naturally we want to write some programs to run on it. We established that we can feed instructions into the computer and get the result of those instructions as output. We know we must encode the instructions into binary for the computer to use them. But what instructions are available and how do we encode the instructions into binary?

This is up to the designer of the computer. The designer specifies what types of instructions are supported and what  sequence of 0s and 1s represent those instructions. This is the language the machine speaks. The digital circuits of the computer are designed to decode the binary digits of the instruction you feed in to know what instruction has been requested.

Below is an example of three instructions in machine language for an x86-64 computer:

```
1000 0011 0111 1101 0000 0100 0000 0001
0111 0101 0000 0111
1100 0111 0100 0101 0010 0100 0000 0010 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000
```

Obviously this is not easy for a human to read and write.[^cypher] We can make it slightly better by using the hexadecimal number system to display the instructions:

[^cypher]: Depends on how long you've escaped the [Matrix](https://youtu.be/MvEXkd3O2ow?feature=shared).

```
83 7d 04 01
75 07
c7 45 24 02 00 00 00
```

These are the same instructions, just converted from the binary number system into the hexadecimal number system. But even still, it's not an efficient way of writing computer programs.

### Assembly Language

Since reading and writing machine language isn't ideal, we go one step above and arrive at assembly language. Assembly language is a more human-readable way of writing machine language. Multiple assembly languages exist since there are multiple types of computer processors with their own set of instructions.

Instructions in assembly language are written using different sequences of letters rather than 1s and 0s. These letters act as mnemonics and are often referred to as such. For example, an instruction that moves data around might have a mnemonic of `MOV`.

Below is an example of the assembly language code for the machine instructions listed earlier:

```
cmp ecx, 1
jne SHORT skipFoo
mov DWORD PTR foo$[rbp], 2
```

This may not make any sense right now, but hopefully it appears easier to read and write than straight machine language.

You could start the translation pipeline here and write your programs using assembly language - and indeed we will do that in this course. But it doesn't take long to realize why we'd want to write programs in a more sophisticated programming language. Here are a few supporting observations:

- Assembly language is still dependent on the target computer's instruction set. A program written in an assembly language targeting one instruction set would need to be re-written in order to work with a different instruction set.
- Writing assembly language requires a more intimate knowledge of the target computer instruction set (e.g., registers, instructions, operands, etc.).
- Assembly language just isn't as friendly compared high-level programming languages.

### High-level Language

The desire for easier, more convenient ways to program a computer has led to the development of a plethora of programming languages other the years. These are so-called "high-level" languages. Each language has different characteristics, benefits, and trade-offs, and usually support multiple computer processors.

Here is the high-level language code (using the C language) for the machine and assembly instructions listed earlier:

```
if (count == 1)
    foo = 3;
```

You can see a stark constrast between the high-level code and the machine language instructions.

#### Comparing High-level vs Assembly Language

Let's compare the high-level code with assembly language again:

```
cmp ecx, 1
jne SHORT skipFoo
mov DWORD PTR foo$[rbp], 2
```

There are two differences we'll highlight between high-level language and assembly language.

1. Different relationships to machine language:

- A high-level language has a **one-to-many** relationship with machine language.[^high-vs-asm]
- Assembly language has a **one-to-one** relationship with machine language.

A single statement of a high-level language is not guaranteed to result in a single machine instruction, and most likely will result in multiple machine instructions. There could be multiple valid combinations of machine instructions to satisfy a high-level statement.

[^high-vs-asm]: Hall & Slonka, p. 4.

2. Different relationships to target processor:

- High-level languages abstract details about the target computer processor.
- Assembly language is dependent on the target processor's instruction set.

High-level languages introduce abstraction to help the programmer focus on the requirements of their application. You can often re-target high-level source code to a different architecture by using a different compiler with little to no changes to the core source code. Developers don’t have to think about or know the inner workings of a particular processor to use these languages.

#### What is "High-level"?

What makes a language "high-level"? These languages provide abstractions and features to make writing programs easier than simply writing assembly language instructions. Even within the high-level languages, some can be considered higher or lower than others.

You can think of them on a spectrum of low-level to high-level. There are no hard definitions or official designations; these labels are more a guage of how much abstraction is introduced by a language. There are probably varying opinions about where exactly a language fits on this scale. 

In general, a lower-level language provides less abstractions and may require more attention to the behavior and performance of the target computer hardware.

Let's look at some examples. On the lower end of the scale are languages like [C](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_(programming_language)), [C++](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B), and [Rust](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rust_(programming_language)). These languages are often used to write system software (e.g., operating systems, drivers, firmware) in addition to application software, and are sometimes referred to as [systems languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_programming_language). The programmer is responsible for allocating and managing memory usage. There isn't an additional runtime environment - the compiled program executes it's instructions directly on the target processor.

Go up the scale a little and you'll see languages like [C#](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_Sharp_(programming_language)) and [Java](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_%28programming_language%29). These languages have an associated runtime environemnt ([Common Language Runtime](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/clr) and [Java Runtime Environment](https://www.ibm.com/topics/jre), respectively). Memory management is automated via the use of [garbage collection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garbage_collection_%28computer_science%29). Code is compiled into an intermediate set of instructions rather than directly into the target processor's instruction set, with the final compilation being done [just-in-time](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Just-in-time_compilation) at runtime.

Higher up the scale and you'll hit scripting languages like [Python](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Python_(programming_language)), [Ruby](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruby_(programming_language)), [JavaScript](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript), and [Lua](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lua_(programming_language)). Even higher you might start seeing [low-code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low-code_development_platform) languages.

We could talk endlessly about different programming languages, but let's get to the bottom line: there are a lot of programming languages with different features that make writing computer programs easier than simply writing machine instructions or assembly language. We generically refer to these as high-level languages.

### Summary

Let's summarize what we've looked at so far. If we want to write a computer program, we usually start by writing code using a high-level language. This code is translated into assembly language, which is translated to machine language, which is then executed on the computer's physical hardware.

Here's a recap of the translation pipeline:
- High-level language - software written by a programmer to achieve a task.
- Assembly language - a human-readable representation of the instruction set.
- Machine language - binary encoded instructions the CPU will execute.
- Digital logic - hardware and electricity that make the magic happen.

## Instruction Set Architecture (ISA)

Recall the discussion earlier about machine language instructions. We established the computer designer is responsible for determining what instructions are available to use. What happens when there are multiple people designing different computers with different instructions? You quickly run into a software compatibility problem. A developer that writes software for one computer will have to re-write that software for another computer.

This is where the _instruction set architecture_ (ISA) comes in. The ISA acts as the bridge between hardware and software. It defines the supported instructions, registers, data types, memory model, etc. that a supported processor must have.[^isa]

[^isa]: Hall & Slonka, p. 5.

The ISA acts as an abstract interface. A computer processor will implement _what_ the ISA specifies, but ISA does not define _how_ it must be implemented. The actual design of a CPU and how the designer chooses to implement a specific ISA is referred to as the processor's microarchitecture (some examples of microarchitectures: [Zen4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zen_4), [Skylake](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skylake_(microarchitecture)), [Haswell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haswell_(microarchitecture)), [Golden Cove](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_Cove)).

What are the benefits of an ISA?

- Software written to target a specific ISA is compatible across different implementations of that ISA. If you write a program for for the x86-64 ISA, the program will run on computers with an Intel x64 CPU or an AMD x64 CPU.

- CPUs can be designed with different characteristics in mind, emphasizing different trade-offs for different requirements (performance, power, size, cost, etc), all while maintaining software compatibility. A laptop CPU has different design concerns than a server CPU.

- Microarchitectures can evolve over time and maintain software compatibility. New CPU architecture techniques are constantly being researched and experimented with to get faster, more efficient processors.

### Examples ISAs

Below are a few examples of instruction set architectures along with some notable devices using compatible CPUs.

- x86, x86-64
  - Dominates desktop, laptop, and server markets
  - Original Xbox, Xbox One and newer, PlayStation 4 and newer
- ARM (32, 64)
  - Dominates mobile device market
  - Common for embedded devices
  - Apple M1/M2
- MIPS
  - N64, PlayStation 1 and 2, PSP
  - Popular with computer architecture courses for universities
  - Development ended in 2021 in favor of RISC-V[^mips-end]
- PowerPC
  - Xbox 360, PlayStation 3
  - Apple used PowerPC CPUs for quite a while; later transitioned to Intel and recently ARM
- 6502
  - Atari, Apple II, Nintendo Entertainment System, Commodore 64
- RISC-V
  - Open source; birthed out of academia but rapidly gaining popularity and traction in industry

We will use x86-64 in this course and will introduce it in more detail later.

[^mips-end]: Turley, Jim (March 8, 2021). ["Wait, What? MIPS Becomes RISC-V"](https://www.eejournal.com/article/wait-what-mips-becomes-risc-v/). Electronic Engineering Journal.

## File and Utility Relationships

We looked at the different stages of the translation pipeline and how it illustrates the translation of human ideas into a program running on a computer. Now let's look at the types of files and utility applications involved in this process.

We'll use C as the high-level language for this example. The general concepts still apply, but there may be special considerations for different programming languages and/or compilers.

The following table lists the different steps of the translation pipeline and releveant utilities involved in going from one stage to another.[^file-and-utils]

[^file-and-utils]: Hall & Slonka, p. 6.

| Translation Stage | File Type | Utility |
| - | - | - |
| High-level language | Source files (.c, .h) | Compiler - takes source code as input and generates assembly language |
| Assembly language | Assembly file (.asm, .s) | Assembler - takes assembly code as input and generates object files
| Machine language | Object file (.o, .obj) | Linker - takes object files and static libraries as input and generates an executable file |
| | Executable file | Loader - Takes an executable file and any required dynamic libraries, loads them into memory, and begins to run the program on the computer
| Digital logic | N/A | Memory/CPU - hardware actually running the machine instructions

Notes:
- C has a preprocessor step that is not accounted for here.
- Some compilers can skip generating assembly and go directly from high-level language to machine language.
- An object file contains machine instructions generated from an input source file. While these files do contain machine code, they do not contain the entire code of the program.
- Static libraries contain reusable code that is included in the final executable. Dynamic libraries are executables that can be reused by different applications, but can be distributed and updated separately.

### Code Example

Follow the instructions in [1-pipeline](../examples/1-pipeline/) for an example demonstrating different steps of the translation pipeline using Visual Studio.

## Why Learn Assembly?

Let's face it - very few people are hired to write programs written in assembly language. So why learn it?

- You learn how things work. The computer is no longer a black box that does magic.
- Improves debugging and problem solving skills. You gain intuition about how things operate which can help when investigating certain software issues.
- There are lots of exciting fields that directly or indirectly uses a knowledge of assembly language and computer architecture: compiler and language development, malware analysis, reverse engineering, embedded development, and systems programming.
- It opens the door for optimizations. Directly optimizing a program by re-writing portions of a program using assembly language is rare these days. However, knowledge about how a CPU works and how a program operates can help you when designing performance sensitive applications.
- It's fun! Computer science and software development is a world of nonstop learning. Assembly language knowledge is a great tool in the tool belt. Ask yourself not "when would I ever use this?", but rather "what cool things can I do with this?"

## Useful Links

- [Textbook videos and resources](https://lowlevelcoder.com)
- [Textbook GitHub repository](https://github.com/brianrhall/Assembly)
- [Comparison of instruction set architectures - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_instruction_set_architectures)
- [Intel Microarchitectures - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Intel_CPU_microarchitectures)
- [Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer Manuals](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/intel-sdm.html)
- [AMD Developer Guides, Manuals & ISA Documents](https://developer.amd.com/resources/developer-guides-manuals/)

## References

Hall, Brian R. & Slonka, Kevin J. _Assembly Programming and Computer Architecture for Software Engineers_. Available from: VitalSource Bookshelf, (2nd Edition). Prospect Press, 2020.
